***************************
Running a Cylc Workflow
***************************

Now that you have successfully copied and edited a workflow,
you are ready to run it! This section will guide you through
the process of installing and running your workflow, monitoring its
progress, and verifying that it has completed successfully.

Installing and Running the Workflow
====================================

Navigate into the ``roses/<suite-id>`` directory you created.

Validate the workflow, install it to ``~/cylc-run`` and play it using:

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Met Office

      .. code-block:: console

            cylc validate-install-play --opt-conf-key=meto-exab

            # Or for ease of typing:
            cylc vip -O meto-exab

   .. tab-item:: Monsoon

      .. code-block:: console

            cylc validate-install-play --opt-conf-key=monsoon

            # Or for ease of typing:
            cylc vip -O monsoon 

Site settings are stored as Rose
:external+rose:ref:`optional configuration` files. For example a configuration
file ``opt/rose-suite-yoursite.conf`` would be selected using
``-O yoursite``.


.. seealso::

   Cylc :external+cylc:ref:`installing_workflows.compound_commands`

.. note::

    We recommend opening a separate terminal window to monitor your workflow, so you can track progress without disrupting your main workflow terminal.

Monitoring Progress
===================

Use one of the following Cylc commands to monitor task states:

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Met Office

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc tui

   .. tab-item:: Monsoon

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc tui 

Both interfaces show nearly identical information — the choice is down to personal preference:

* **cylc gui** — easier to interact with, but requires an X11 connection.
* **cylc tui** — lightweight and works well in any terminal without X11.

Verifying the Workflow Has Run Successfully
===========================================

After successful completion of the workflow, you should see all tasks marked as ``succeeded`` in the monitoring interface. You can also inspect the output files generated by the model in the suite run directory to confirm that the expected diagnostics or fields are present.

As a check:

* Confirm all required tasks have the ``succeeded`` status.
* Inspect model output in the suite run directory.
* Validate expected files, fields, or diagnostics from the exercise.

Restarting a Workflow
=====================

If you have a workflow that has finished running and you wish to make a change and restart it, use the ``cylc vr`` command:

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Met Office

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc vr <suite-id>/run#

   .. tab-item:: Monsoon

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc vr <suite-id>/run# 

This will verify and reinstall the workflow, capturing any changes you have made, and then continue running from where it left off.

Stopping or Cleaning a Workflow
================================

To stop a running workflow:

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Met Office

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc stop <SUITE-ID>

   .. tab-item:: Monsoon

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc stop <SUITE-ID> 

.. note::

    You do not need to wait for the workflow to stop before removing it.

To remove an installed workflow:

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Met Office

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc clean <SUITE-ID>

   .. tab-item:: Monsoon

      .. code-block:: console

         cylc clean <SUITE-ID>

This removes the workflow from the system, but the suite directory will still exist in ``~/roses``. You can remove this manually if you wish.