.. _practical_3_1-caption:

Practical 1: Run the model from command line
--------------------------------------------

Before showing how to run LFRic Atmosphere as part of Cylc workflows, this practical introduces it as a command line application. It demonstrates how to:

*	Build and run the model from the command line.
*	Add custom messages to the model’s standard output.

**Step 1: Compile the model**

1. Checkout the code using Subversion (SVN):

   .. code-block:: text

      mkdir practical_command_line
      cd  practical_command_line
      svn co https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/svn/lfric_apps/main/trunk lfric_apps

2.	Set up the build environment and select the compiler.

 Instructions depend on your platform. For Met Office Azure Spice, use:

   .. collapse:: Met Office Azure Spice

                 .. code-block:: text

                                 ml use ~lfricadmin/lmod
                                 ml lfric

 For other platforms, see the `LFRic Development Environment <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/lfric/wiki/DevelopmentEnvironment>`_ .

3. Compile the model

   .. code-block:: text
      :emphasize-lines: 2

      cd lfric_apps
      ./build/local_build.py -a lfric_atm

 The compilation may take some time and uses code from the different repositories, algorithms, and kernels. It invokes PSyclone, compiles, and links the code. The compiled model executable ``lfric_atm`` will be in the folder ``applications/lfric_atm/bin/`` once the compilation finished.

**Step 2: Run the model**

The code contains an example configuration, colloquially called "canned configuration", in  the namelist file `applications/lfric_atm/example/configuration.nml <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/lfric_apps/browser/main/trunk/applications/lfric_atm/example/configuration.nml>`_. This configuration sets up a "single column" run of LFRic Atmosphere. It is configured to use the mesh file in the `example <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/lfric_apps/browser/main/trunk/applications/lfric_atm/example>`_ directory which is, in reality, not a single column mesh, but a 2x2 biperiodic mesh. However, the configuration is designed in such a way that each column is computed independently from the other columns and, in fact, gives identical results for each column.

1. Navigate to the example configuration directory:

   .. code-block:: text
      :emphasize-lines: 2

      cd applications/lfric_atm/example
      ../bin/lfric_atm configuration.nml


2.	Run the example with a “single-column” configuration:

   .. code-block:: text
      :emphasize-lines: 1

      ../bin/lfric_atm configuration.nml

 The namelist file ``configuration.nml`` configures the model run.
 
 
3. Redirect the standard output to a text file to examine later:

.. code-block:: bash

   ../bin/lfric_atm configuration.nml > log.txt


4.	Explore the outputs:

 ``log.txt`` and the other output files contain log messages from the I/O system, run time profiling, `checksums <https://github.com/MetOffice/simulation-systems/discussions/370>`_ of model fields after the last time step for tests, and three NetCDF files. Using the knowledge from module 2 of this training it is possible to open these files and explore the data produced by the model run.

.. note::  The NetCDF output is configured by the file `iodef.xml  <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/lfric_apps/browser/main/trunk/applications/lfric_atm/example/iodef.xml#L46>`_ in the example directory. It controls the output streams, filenames, written fields, and output frequency.

**Step 3: Add a custom message to model output**

To gain familiarity with the model:

1. Add your own print statement at the end of each time step (and a different print statement after time step 72).

 .. hint:: Search the code for the log messages available in ``log.txt`` (e.g. with ``grep -R "End of timestep" *``) to find where to change the code and write such an output.


 .. important:: Note that you have to edit the file ``gungho_step_mod.x90`` in `science/gungho/source/driver <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/lfric_apps/browser/main/trunk/science/gungho/source/driver/>`_  not the autogenerated ``gungho_step_mod.f90`` in ``applications/lfric_atm/working/build_lfric_atm/driver``.

2.	Adjust the code, re-compile, and re-run the model.

 You will see your new message in the output.

   .. _practical_3_1-hint_code:

   .. hint:: You can write to standard output by adding the following Fortran code at the end of the subroutine gungho_step in the file `gungho_step_mod.x90 <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/lfric_apps/browser/main/trunk/science/gungho/source/driver/gungho_step_mod.x90?rev=9055#L217>`_ in the folder ``science/gungho/source/driver``:

      .. collapse:: Fortran code to write info message

         .. code-block:: fortran

                         write( log_scratch_space, '(A)' ) "###_INFO_#1 END OF TIME STEP"  
                         call log_event( log_scratch_space, LOG_LEVEL_INFO )  

                         if (model_clock%get_step() .lt. 72) then  
                            write( log_scratch_space, '(A)' ) "###_INFO_#2 THE WEATHER IS FINE"  
                         else  
                            write( log_scratch_space, '(A)' ) "###_INFO_#2 ENJOY THE MODEL TUTORIAL"  
                         endif  
                         call log_event( log_scratch_space, LOG_LEVEL_INFO )  

Code changes like you have implmeneted here belong into version control. Practical 3 will introduce ticketing and version control for LFRic code.

.. note:: Changes like the one you've implemented here should be tracked using version control. This ensures traceability and supports collaborative development. You'll learn how to document and manage your code changes using tickets and branches in Practical 3.
